---
layout: post
title: "In on the Joke: Barbie and the State of the World at the End of 2023"
tags: movies
---

I had the opportunity to see <i>Barbie</i> in the theater when it came out, but I skipped it. The relenteless hype around the movie (and the Barbenheimer jokes being absolutely beaten into the ground) made me feel so embittered that I didn't want to spoil everyone else's good time. (For the record I haven't seen <i>Oppenheimer</i> either.) As it turns out, I was right to stay home. I watched the movie recently at home, and I didn't like it.

My not liking a movie is nothing unusual and nothing to write about. But I was so unimpressed with the movie, while so many of my friends liked it, that I continued to think about it. I've decided that the fault is mine--that I don't know how to watch the movie.

I watched it as a story told in the universe of the movie itself, which is to say, as movies are conventionally watched. Watching <i>Star Wars</i> means understanding that the events on the screen take place a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away. The <i>Barbie</i> movie, by contrast, takes place in our world, the real world. (Yes, this means the "real world" that Barbie and Ken visit in the movie is at one level of remove from our world.) This is not to say that it merely reflects or comments on the real world. Rather, the movie and its production are properly viewed as artifacts of the movie's world. The fact that the toy company Mattel produced the movie is part of the text of the movie, not outside of it. The movie's marketing, enthusiastically taken up by fans, perhaps best emblematized by the big, pink Barbie boxes used for taking and sharing photos, is also part of the movie's text.

Watching the movie, as I did, led me to assess that the visuals were clever, fully realized, and striking, but the story and the script were weak. The central conflict is the difficulty of becoming a woman. It's a good premise for an undergraduate course or an Instagram post, but it's so hopelessly uninteresting for a feature film that <i>Barbie</i> has to temporarily become The <i>Ken</i> Movie for the second act. The movie is not about one particular woman coming of age; it's about a generic woman (or "Stereotypical Barbie," in the movie's gratingly misapplied phrase) learning what it means to be a generic woman. There is a good reason why nearly all narratives, even ones which stand in for broader experiences, center on one particular character: trying to capture the experiences of an identity rather than a person risks stripping the story of specificity and thus losing the audience's interest. In other words, it is not a story. <i>Barbie</i> ultimately has to try to anchor its main storyline in America Ferrera's character, the real-world source of Barbie's existential crisis. But overall, the movie's conflict is not that of a person; it's of a gender. The script, then, gets cobbled together out of snarky applause lines and earnest heart-to-heart conversations. 

There's a very practical reason why the <i>Barbie</i> movie has to be about Barbie; which is to say, why it can't actually be a story about any particular woman. It's because it's the Barbie movie! The entire premise is that the doll's imagined life is malleable and open-ended. But everyone who sees the movie understands this, and this is why my reading of the movie is flawed. Where I saw the movie as being non-committal and unwisely ambitious, others saw it as a clever and knowing product that emerged from impossible constraints. While I can't say that it's a good movie, I have to admire the ability of Greta Gerwig to take a creative brief for a glorified commercial and make it into entertainment. The headline for Jacobin's <a href="https://jacobin.com/2023/07/barbie-movie-review-mattel-consumerism-feminism">review</a> is, "It's Kind of Amazing that Barbie Manages to Be as Good as it is." Seen this way (and this is the more appropriate way to see the movie), Gerwig may well have changed the game of movie-making. 

Another way of saying this comes from Margot Robbie, the movie's star. Interviewed for a Time magazine <a href="https://time.com/6289864/barbie-time-cover-story/">cover story</a>, Robbie says, "We're in on the joke. This isn't a Barbie puff piece." The joke is that Gerwig got to make the movie she wanted to make on Mattel's dime, smuggling in a feminism that is several degrees more subversive than the suits would otherwise permit. Gerwig calls the movie a "surprising spicy margarita" and a "goddamn miracle" in the same Time feature. We learn that the president of Mattel objected to something "off-brand" in the script, before he flew to the movie set in London and relented when Robbie and Gerwig performed the scene for him. 

This anecdote frustrates me in the same way that the movie frustrated me. The assertion that "this isn't a Barbie puff piece" makes me want to remind everyone that the movie was bankrolled by Mattel to sell dolls. I was born in 1982, which means I came of age amid debates about "selling out." The conceit, in the first half of the 1990s, was that art could be uncompromising and radical, but only if it rejected the explicit commerciality of mainstream channels. The discourse of selling out accepted as a given that signing a contract with money-making, industry types would result in something designed for profit rather than true, authentic expression. Of course, thinking this way in 2023 is obnoxious. Trying to make money from one's art is a necessity and always has been. But the reason why generations following Gen X have not carried on with concerns of selling out is that the window that briefly existed, in which a burgeoning side industry of independent financing and distribution could put out artistically challenging and innovative work, has definitively closed. "Sellout" was an epithet used to try to shepherd interesting and talented artists into supporting an indie media ecosystem, but these days there is little sense in talking about major labels and big studios. To quote Margaret Thatcher, "There is no alternative."

Still, my mind goes to other avenues of critical analysis. Roland Barthes might have classified Robbie's open acknowledgement of the product's flaws as "inoculation," a tactic of admitting a little bit of fault that counterintuitively leads to its acceptance, as part of a larger project of depoliticizing certain elements of speech to make them appear natural. It's worth noting that the narrative that Gerwig et al actually subverted the process, either stated explicitly in interviews or understood on a more intuitive level, is a linchpin in the overall Barbie movie phenomenon. This is the thrust of a Time cover story, after all--not "journalism" but part of the promotional apparatus that big media products depend on. Mattel is the villain in the movie's actual conflict, in which Gerwig is the protagonist and the making of the movie itself is the story. Of course, the overall impact from this narrative is a positive impression of Mattel as a brand and, likely, increased sales of Barbie dolls. Barbie, like <i>Barbie</i>, is in on the joke.

In an older generation, there may not have been a way to maneuver around the difficulty of making sponsored content as an impactful, relevant movie. But social media has changed a lot of things. Theodor Adorno's conception of the culture industry may still have some things to say--I think the notion that entertainment and commercials share an artistic language still rings true--but the industry is increasingly less of an assembly line and more of an incubator. In addition to film studios and music labels, the culture industry now includes social media platforms. 

I remember vaguely thinking a few years ago (probably before the Black Lives Matter protest movement of 2020) about how Instagram had very little political content and discussion relative to Twitter or Facebook (or Tumblr, I suppose, or Reddit). I thought that the very format was resistant to that sort of content. Instagram was the place for showing the aspirational side of one's life, through images, not text. Since then, Instagram has become awash with politics. (Threads, another Meta product, exists as an unholy no-man's-land as of this writing.) I think the influence of TikTok and its userbase of teens and young adults has had something to do with that. Regardless of how it happened, the structure of the platform did not fundamentally change. Influencers and content creators still serve as the foundation of one's feed, and if you're lucky a few of your friends' posts get sprinkled in. Infographics and educational political slides have become another form of content with which influencers build their brand, and big accounts funnel these slide decks into the feed, alongside funny videos and glamorous photo shoots, with professional regularity and Canva-assisted design sensibility.

A Tiktok For Business <a href="https://www.tiktok.com/business/en-US/blog/real-tok-re-thinking-influence-in-the-age-of-tiktok">presentation</a> from two years ago lays out this shift, titled "Rethinking the 3 Drivers of Influence." These are as follows: Platforms lend themselves to communities, not networks; content allows participation between brands and content, not one-way storytelling; and creators champion authenticity, not aspiration. On that last point, the presentation claims that "realness is the new cultural currency worth championing." This is hilarious to me. I'm too old to bother with Tiktok, but this type of thing solidifies my distaste. "Realness" and "cultural currency" in the same sentence will never not be silly to me, but this is the way people communicate now. Understanding the platform and operating within it are not the same as endorsing it. The choice always exists to delete one's account, but cultural touchstones exist on social media, just as they used to exist on network television. Staying offline means becoming out of touch and illiterate. The culture industry is not any more democratic than it has ever been, but the gesture away from "one-way storytelling" lends to more user participation, more user satisfaction, and more dollars. It is out of these communities (not networks) that the Barbie movie, through its marketing, communicated realness and participation as part of its text. This is the arena in which Greta Gerwig's genius is most evident, and part of this has to do with her savvy leveraging of her brand. Brands and influence are operative concepts here. If Tina Fey had made an identical movie, <i>Tina Fey's Barbie</i> would have nevertheless been a different movie. This is not to say that it would have been received differently--ontologically, it would have been different.

I think there is another aspect to the rise of political content on visual and video platforms like Instagram and Tiktok. People always want to know what is happening in the world, but young people don't get news from traditional media. Adults aged 18-34 are the <a href="https://www.statista.com/statistics/742225/frequency-of-watching-cable-news-in-the-us-age/
">least likely</a> to watch cable news, with 10% of that demographic watching daily versus 45% who never watch. This is not because young people are uniquely incurious or ignorant. It's because cable news (which is also an entertainment product) doesn't speak to young people's concerns or worldviews. It's not reliable. 

Young people are significantly more critical of the status quo than older generations, and their rejection of legacy media reflects that. In this sense, <i>Manufacturing Consent</i> may be a subtle source text for the <i>Barbie</i> movie phenomenon in the way that <i>The Feminine Mystique</i> is a more obvious one. But the subversion of young adults is not being passed in secret through photocopied punk zines. It's happening out in the open on the very networks that they are critical of. Prison abolition and calling for a free Palestine are in the same feed as sponcon and ads--and in the same feed where right-wing influencers and dubious fundraising efforts drift in and out, from cause to cause, building their brands and occasionally making a heel turn. Moments of clarity are few and far between. My older, hidebound version of cultural criticsm wants to make points about Adorno as if they are outside the movie's text, but the fact that it takes place in our world means that critical theory--including Barthes, Adorno, and the slogans of older generations, "The medium is the message" and "The personal is political"--are in the soil that Barbie grows from, along with all manner of marketing and business-speak, all composting together.

The nineteenth-century critic August Wilhelm Schlegel offered the following interpretation of the chorus in classical Greek theater. The chorus was a "personified reflection of the action going on." It was the "ideal spectator," that "conveys to the actual spectator a lyrical and musical expression of his own emotions." And it represented "the general sympathy of all mankind." In other words, the chorus chimed in with a baseline reaction to the drama's events to get the audience on the same page. What I referred to earlier as "snarky applause lines" or what Eileen Jones in Jacobin refers to as "feminist pieties" function in <i>Barbie</i> like the chorus in ancient Greek drama: not to necessarily present an idea but to vacate the myriad other ideas that could exist in their place. The little jokes about the patriarchy served to reflect back to the audience the perspective of the ideal spectator. The type of criticism that I'm interested in--evaluating these lines of text for the values they communicate through their literal, textual meaning--is the last thing that Barbie's audience wants to do. People went in to watch a fun movie that would affirm a shared set of values. One of the script's main tasks was to present which version of a general sympathy the audience would be expected to adopt for the sake of the story. 

The people who enjoyed <i>Barbie</i> don't need me to remind them, in light of the movie's celebration of its all-woman Supreme Court, that a Supreme Court full of Amy Coney Barrett's would not result in a pink utopia, any more than they need me to tell them that the actors in the movie are playing a role. As Eileen Jones astutely points out, the Barbenheimer joke is that the two movies take place in the same, grim universe--in our real world. The escapist hope of Barbie Land is the hope for a world in which an all-woman Supreme Court <i>could</i> create a utopia. 

For the last three years, at least, it has been common for people on social media to make jokes about "the horrors," or some other unspecified state of the world, for which the consensus is that things are bad and getting worse. The movie doesn't take place in a beachside community where everyone has a big mansion and every night is girls' night. It takes place in a world where Donald Trump became president, a pandemic is still happening while everyone looks the other way, and a promised return to normal has only resulted in the country's inching closer to an existential precipice. Being in on the joke, when it comes to <i>Barbie</i>, means saying, "Fuck it," and taking a photo in a big, pink box while smiling incongruously.
